[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>REGINA MEREDITH: It's
our greatest pleasure
to have Andrew Harvey
back with us today.
We've discussed radical
passion and the transformation
of Christianity back
to its mystical roots
in our past conversations.
Today, Andrew is
going to walk us
through the topic
of love and action.
To sit in meditation
and feel the love
is beautiful and
transformational,
but Andrew believes it
isn't enough in a world that
is fighting to hold its light.
He says we need to use our love
and passion in an active way
to create the new
world we all dream of.
And welcome back once again.
>>ANDREW HARVEY:
Lovely to be here.
>>REGINA: Just my favorite ever.
In past conversations, we've
really kept a lot of light
in the discussions.
>>HARVEY: Yes.
>>REGINA: And it's really been
of a transformative nature.
In this particular
conversation, we're
going to have to knock
it down a little bit
and go into the reason
we need to become
active in the
transformation process,
not just personally, but
for the planet at large.
And it isn't a New Age concept.
There's a reason for it.
>>HARVEY: Oh, god.
>>REGINA: And you've been driven
by this haunting, deep belief
that we are in a horrible
crisis, beyond what many others
would even suggest.
>>HARVEY: Yes.
>>REGINA: And I would like you
to speak to that for however
long it takes, to share your
version of what this world is
going through right now.
It is, on many
levels, a dark moment.
>>HARVEY: Well, I
believe three things.
I believe that we are in an
immense evolutionary crisis
and that our
consciousness is not
up to the level of the
problems that we've created.
That's the first
thing I believe.
The second thing I believe
is that this crisis
has two fundamental faces.
One face, which we
have to look into
and we have to be able to
be brave enough to see,
is the face of what I
call the "Great Death."
And this terrifying,
menacing death
is happening on
every single level.
The environment is in free-fall.
Three billion people are
living on less than $1 a day.
90% of the seas are polluted.
120 species are vanishing
every single day.
We have in place an absolutely
ruthless, insane form
of capitalism.
Just this morning, I read that
CEOs are making even more money
than ever, paying each other
even more fabulous bonuses
at a time when the
world is groaning
in misery and heartbreak.
We have to face this death.
Many people in the New Age say
if you look at the negative,
you'll make it more negative.
This is horse shit.
It's as if you
were to have cancer
and your doctor was to tell
you, oh, no, don't worry.
You only have a cold.
Here is an aspirin.
You'd sack that
doctor, wouldn't you,
when you found out the truth?
We cannot go through what we
have to go through until we
face the consequences of what
we've created from our mad
hubris of exploitation and
domination and narcissism
and selfishness.
We have brought
ourselves to a crisis
in which the whole future of
the human race is at stake
and a great deal of nature.
If that was all
that was happening,
I would suggest to
everybody listening
that they made some James
Jones Kool-Aid, sung "Kumbaya"
or "I will Overcome,"
for the last time,
and lie down and die, preferably
under a friendly truck which
would make it fast.
>>REGINA: [LAUGHS]
>>HARVEY: But that's not
all that's happening.
What I have come to
understand from the deepest
inner experience is that
this Great Death is actually
the crucible for a
tremendous birth.
And that birth is also
taking place on the planet.
>>REGINA: But isn't this the
nature of all cycles of life?
>>HARVEY: Yes.
The world, the universe,
is a dance of opposites.
And what we're now seeing is
the complete, ferocious, amazing
dance of the divine, an
extreme opposite of death
and the other extreme opposite
of a birth, which is absolutely
unprecedented, a birth of
wholly new possibilities
in technology-- which,
if we turn to them,
could save us-- new
sources of energy;
a birth of wholly
new forms of business
and economics, which are being
worked out by brilliant people;
a birth of a
mystical renaissance,
saturated with the vision
of the motherhood of God;
where all the treasures of
all the mystical systems
are available to us and
all the sacred technologies
of sacred practice
are available to us.
We're at a moment of crossroads.
Which will we choose,
the insanity of power
or the divine insanity of love?
And the third thing I believe is
that there is a force on Earth
right now, being born in great
intensity, which could not only
save us from the dereliction
that threatens us,
but actually help us birth
a new kind of humanity
and a new world.
And that force is what I've
called "Sacred Activism."
It's the force of
divine love in action.
And there are two ways that
I define sacred activism.
The first is the
user friendly, not
too threatening way, which
I use when I must by CNN
or something to explain this--
>>REGINA: Yes, the
polite version.
>>HARVEY: --the mild way,
the polite version-- and that
is that, when you combine a
deep spiritual understanding
with a commitment to
justice, a holy force
is borne which can,
over time, transform
the most insoluble problems.
And we've seen this in Gandhi.
We've seen this in
Martin Luther King.
We've seen this in Leck Walesa.
We've seen this in Desmond Tutu.
We see this now on the stage
of the world in Aung San Suu
Kyi, someone who has held
fast to her spiritual vision
but is also affecting a
political and economic
transformation in
her own country.
That's the first
explanation and definition.
The second definition
goes deeper for me,
because it points to how
evolutionary this power is.
When I was writing my
book, "The Hope," trying
to give the whole roadmap
to sacred activism,
how to be a sacred
activist, how to enact it,
I begged God-- actually, I
begged Jesus-- for a vision.
Because my work has always
progressed by deep thought,
but also by
visionary experience,
like all other visionaries.
And I had this vision of
two rivers of fire racing
towards the sea and meeting in
this immense nuclear explosion.
But it wasn't a
destructive explosion.
It was an explosion of power!
And as I watched this
revelation, I heard the words,
"when the river of the fire of
the mystic's passion for God
is united with the river of
the fire of the activist's
passion for justice,
a third fire
is created, which is a
quantum leap of power."
And I remembered, when I was
awoken from this vision, two
great texts, which I've
loved for a long time
but which, suddenly, became
absolutely clear to me.
The first was from
Teilhard de Chardin.
And Teilhard de Chardin, the
great, evolutionary Christian
mystic wrote, "Someday,
after we have mastered
the tides and gravity, we shall
harness the energies of love."
Harness the energies of love.
"And then, for the second time
in the history of humanity,
humanity will have
discovered fire."
And the second text-- and
we'll go into that one.
Let me just finish my-- because
this is such a gorgeous text.
And this is the
real key, I think.
It comes from Rumi.
He says, "Passion burns down
every branch of exhaustion.
Passion is the supreme
elixir and renews all things.
So don't sigh heavily,
your brow bleak
with cynicism and boredom.
Dare to look for passion,
passion, passion, passion.
Run far away, my friends,
from all false solutions.
Let divine passion triumph
and rebirth you in yourself."
So what those two
texts are saying
is really offering us the key
of this great transformation
that we are called upon.
How do we get in
touch with passion
so that we can
incarnate this passion
in humble, sacred action?
Without the passion, we
won't have the energy.
Without the wisdom,
we won't have
the clarity and
the skillful means.
The passion and the
wisdom, the great peace
and the great wildness have
to come together and have
to be focused on very
urgent action in every realm
and on every plane for us to
have a heaven of a chance.
But we do have that chance.
But the time is now running out.
>>REGINA: Absolutely,
it is running out.
>>HARVEY: It is.
>>REGINA: And at the same
time, the time is now.
>>HARVEY: Yes.
>>REGINA: I mean, it's both.
We're at that
confluence right now.
And--
>>HARVEY: Well,
in a way, it seems
as if the time has stopped.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>HARVEY: Because if you look
at it from a position of facts,
there are many
environmentalists--
and these are very
wise people-- who
say we have already
passed the line.
And there are many
economists who
say that the economic
system is bound to collapse
and will create untold misery.
And there are many
activists who are
so bound up by all the horror
and the tragedy that they've
seen and by the coma of
indifference and apathy
that they've met that they say
the human race is unredeemable.
And they do have a point.
They're not mad people.
They're people who
have suffered hugely
and who see, without illusion,
the very extreme situation
that we are in.
But they're ignoring two things.
First, that the
very horror itself
can be the midwife of an
extraordinary transformation.
And secondly, that God is in
both, the horror and the light.
And that there is a divine
plan, an evolutionary plan,
and it entails this
great burning down.
Because you cannot create a
new world without burning down
the structures of
oppression of the old one.
>>REGINA: Absolutely,
and oftentimes
in various spiritual
circles, they'll
talk about the inevitability
of the birth of a new humanity.
But you say, no--
>>HARVEY: You can't have--
>>REGINA: --this
is not inevitable.
>>HARVEY: No!
>>REGINA: --Without our
participation and advanced
consciousness--
>>HARVEY: This is rubbish!
Look, let's get down to it.
If you want me tell
you what I really--
>>REGINA: Yes, please
don't hold back, Andrew.
>>HARVEY: I'm not going to.
Because there's no
time to hold back.
The fact is the New Age did
a great service in many ways.
It brought in deep
understanding of the divine.
It brought in a
marvelous understanding
of the relationship between
mysticism and science.
It brought in a whole new set
of marvelous sacred technologies
for the body.
These were great achievements.
But the New Age got hijacked
by the corporate agenda
and was transformed by
that corporate agenda
into being a massive,
narcissistic orgy in which
people were told that you
connected with the divine,
basically, to get rich and
fabulous and thin, and manifest
McMansions and Mercedes.
This is not just stupid
and vulgar, it's demonic.
It is insane at a
period like ours,
when the world is falling
apart, to have in place,
sponsored by the corporations
and the major publishers,
a vision of mysticism which is
all about you, you, you, you.
>>REGINA: Well, 100% material!
>>HARVEY: Totally materialistic,
and totally narcissistic,
and absolutely part of
the corporate agenda.
Because what does the
corporate agenda want
but a whole group of
people who believed
that, by spending
more on yoga clothes
and going to very
expensive intensives,
they could become
rich, fabulous,
and thin, and powerful.
And that just increases the
dissociation, the addiction
to individualism, the
separation that is actually
at the root of everything.
So what's now needed is to say
we accept the good things from
this, and we are very grateful
that they were accomplished,
but we cannot anymore afford
this disgusting, obscene,
blasphemous, idiotic, totally
unauthentic mysticism.
It is not real.
And it's not true.
The great mystics of all the
civilizations-- especially
Jesus, and the Prophet,
and the Buddha-- say,
when you are realized,
it's not that you
use that power to make yourself
rich and famous and gorgeous.
You use that power
to serve humanity.
And at this time, in this era,
humanity is burning to death.
So without turning
that realization
into sacred action, what
the heaven are you doing?
>>REGINA: And if not
burning to death, really,
just turning to
stone, even more so.
>>HARVEY: Yes, that's
a colder death.
>>REGINA: It's a
colder kind of death.
Because it is one of becoming
numb, numb to reality,
numb to the need.
>>HARVEY: Well, did you see
what that thing-- that boy
said-- this terrible thing
that the boy said who'd
killed the teenagers
yesterday or a couple of days
ago when he was arraigned?
>>REGINA: No, I didn't.
>>HARVEY: First of all, he
came into the courtroom,
and he had "Killer"
on his tee-shirt.
And he turned and flashed
that at the families
who'd lost their children.
And then he said,
"I want you to know
that the hand that
killed your children
is also jerking off
to their memory."
>>REGINA: Oh, jeez.
>>HARVEY: Can you imagine?
Look at the case of
the school kids--
high school kids who raped a
girl and who televised that--
videoed that rape--
>>REGINA: I know, it was just--
>>HARVEY: --and who
just let it happen.
The soul of the world
is turning to ice.
And I believe that the
divine is the great fire that
is trying to melt this ice
and that sacred activism
is the power that-- if only
we can get truly, truly
attuned to it-- will help us
overcome this terrible apathy,
this terrible coca
coma we're in,
this appalling addiction
to irony and cynicism
and paralysis that has
now flamed the human soul.
>>REGINA: But addicted
is the correct word.
If you're looking at it from a
purely chemical point of view,
the brain is addicted to these
levels of fear and destruction
now.
I mean, that's why the saying,
when it bleeds, it leads.
And that is true.
And so we have a
chemical addiction
for whatever needs
to be exploited
by the media in that moment.
And we have to find
our way out of that.
We're narcotized, hypnotized.
We have to find our way out,
to break that because it
is creating, truly, a paralysis.
And I swear, we would
rather do anything
than have to listen to one
more headline, most of us.
Even though we're addicted,
we can barely stand it anymore
as a species.
We're breaking under the
weight of the negativity.
>>HARVEY: Well, I
think that there
only three possible
solutions, really,
and we have to do them all.
I think, first of all, we
need to simplify our life
and carve out time for silence,
time to commune, just simply,
with reality.
The second thing we need to do,
all of us, all human beings,
is to have a very simple
spiritual practice
that we do regularly.
Because only such
a simple practice
can create a container
strong enough for us
to be able to face where we are.
And the third thing
that we all need to do--
and this is the message
of sacred activism--
is that we all need to
start-- within the terms
of our own lives,
temperaments, and resources--
start doing something
real about the real agony,
and the real heartbreak,
and the real misery,
and the real suffering
that is in the real world,
doing something in the name
of justice and compassion.
It doesn't have to
be Mother Theresa.
You don't have to wake up
tomorrow and go and live
in Calcutta and give
everything away.
You don't have to
be Desmond Tutu.
You have to be you as a caring,
loving, human being, aware
that you're part of a human
race that is potentially
going extinct through
its own madness.
And you have to peacefully but
passionately turn up and choose
something, anything, and
focus your energies on that,
and really help.
Because if you do,
you will discover
that your life will be
flooded with meaning and joy
and passion.
And that's what everybody needs
to experience at this time.
>>REGINA: And yet, every
single message out there
is telling us everything
but to simplify.
Make it more complex.
We have greater needs.
You're not enough for this.
You don't have enough of that.
You're not good enough at that.
>>HARVEY: Right.
>>REGINA: And so, every
message is reinforcing the need
to go further into the external
world and complicate it.
>>HARVEY: Well, and if you have,
on top of that, the churches
regressing into fundamentalism--
Islam and Judaism
and Christianity-- and
the New Age celebrating
"The Secret," which is the
Whore of Babylon masturbating
in public, I would say-- to
put it mildly-- telling people
that God is there as a
kind of servant in hotpants
to fulfill every fantasy
of your ego, then
how will people get
to the authentic truth
of the authentic
relationship with the divine?
And how will they get
to the empowerment
that comes through that?
That's what my life and the
life of the other teachers
like myself has been
devoted to, to get
the real message of
the real mysticism
and the real practices
across to people.
Because, if they don't get
to it, the world will end.
>>REGINA: And
ironically, you were
talking about the
extinction of our species.
And yet, at the same time,
if you look at it from--
>>HARVEY: Not just our species!
>>REGINA: Of all species--
>>HARVEY: --the
lions, the leopards--
>>REGINA: Yes, I understand.
>>HARVEY: --my god, sometimes I
feel if it was just us that was
going--
>>REGINA: That would
be OK. [LAUGHS]
>>HARVEY: --that might be
a good thing for nature.
But we are taking, like
Hitler was taking-- wanted
to take the whole of
Germany with him at the end.
It seems that we're on
an orgy of destruction,
which is bent on taking.
Why should my cat
suffer for what we are?
Why should the white
lions have to endure
the horror of canned hunting?
Why should the elephants be
being slaughtered for ivory?
Why should these gorgeous
beasts, the rhinos,
be being killed so that
politicians in Thailand
can have erections?
This is unspeakable.
>>REGINA: It is.
It's barbaric.
>>HARVEY: It is.
>>REGINA: I mean, these are
the Dark Ages in that respect.
But what I was going--
>>HARVEY: There have
never been such dark ages.
This is the ultimate Dark Age.
Because there's a whole
coating of business-as-usual,
Versailles-on-crack--
you know what I'm saying?
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>HARVEY: The CEOs
make Marie Antoinette
look like Mother Teresa.
>>REGINA: And yet,
at the same time,
I'm looking at a
flat out agenda,
you could say an elite agenda--
>>HARVEY: Oh, very much so.
>>REGINA: --which is to see
to it that-- now, I'm only
speaking of the human
population at this point--
is reduced to, roughly, a
half a billion people, looking
at the Georgia
guide-stones and some
of the other well-known
agendas, which is interesting.
You say, we don't need any help.
Because we're on the path
to doing that to ourselves.
>>HARVEY: Yes.
>>REGINA: But not
without a great deal
of help in the psychological,
emotional, mental realms
from the puppet
masters that project
all of these images to us that
are, quote, "for our own good."
>>HARVEY: You know,
at one time, when
I heard something
like that, I thought
this was conspiracy theory.
>>REGINA: No.
>>HARVEY: But it isn't.
When you look at the way in
which the media is set up
to pour avalanches of
trash and insecurity
into people's minds--
and violence--
and get fat-cat rich out of
it, when you look at the way
in which those religious
positions are celebrated
by the corporations that keep
alive their vision of keeping
people greedy and atomized, when
you look at the way in which
corporations run by a few
individuals dominate the media,
politicians, and the whole
world in which we live and have
almost total freedom to do
whatever they like including,
in America-- through the
Supreme Court, no less--
to buy any politician
they want--
because they are
individuals and they
can pay whatever they want--
>>REGINA: I know, it's sick.
>>HARVEY: --it's insane.
Of course, there is an agenda.
And of course, if you were
a rich, unscrupulous, crazy
person who really wanted to
keep your power, what you would
be planning is,
let billions die.
The rest will be
cowed and frightened.
We will bring in our leader.
We will dominate everything.
And we will keep our power.
That's what's on.
That's what they're doing.
>>REGINA: Well, that game is on.
We're in the midst of it.
And everything you
speak to is, really,
to counter that particular
game through the re-awakening
of ourselves.
I mean, the greatest sin--
if you can call anything
a sin, per se-- is that the
human species has been cut off,
intentionally, from knowledge of
itself, its own divine nature.
>>HARVEY: That's it.
But first, there are two kinds
of knowledge that you need.
First, you need the
knowledge that you
are one with divine
consciousness in your core.
Then, you need
the knowledge that
at the core of that
divine consciousness
is a burning love for reality
that translates itself
as love in action on
behalf of justice.
>>REGINA: Fearless.
>>HARVEY: Fearless, passionate,
compassionate love in action.
If you only have the
first-- as a lot of people
are getting to-- you don't
have the active component.
If you have both what you could
call the passive component
of understanding your divine
consciousness as great peace,
immortality,
transcendent awareness,
you only have one
side of the picture.
The other side is
the mother side.
You've got to also know that
that divine consciousness is
passionately concerned
with the animals,
with the state of the fields,
with the state of the seas--
>>REGINA: With the water, yes.
>>HARVEY: --with the
poor, with the water.
Because it is living
in those things.
It is living in
and as everything.
And both forms of
knowledge are very
dangerous to the
patriarchy, that close.
And that's why they have so
brilliantly sponsored the New
Age agenda, which really
renders people passive.
Because they don't really
get to divine consciousness
in the New Age.
And they certainly
don't get to action.
They get to a kind of
glorified narcissism
in which they do
absolutely nothing
and claim to be realized.
>>REGINA: Yes, and sometimes
even a numbness of sorts.
>>HARVEY: Numbness of sorts?
It's worse than that.
They are actually psychotic.
Because, I think, when people
say, only the light is real,
the devil laughs, if you like.
The demonic laughs.
Here, we have the darkness in
us having a worldwide terminal
orgy.
And you have spiritual
leaders, so-called,
in soft voices saying,
only the light is real.
Don't look at the dark.
Don't.
Everything's in divine order.
What an insult to God to assume
that what we've created out
of the world through our
greed is in divine order.
Why would God have
sent the prophets?
Why would God have sent
the Buddha and Jesus
and the Prophet?
>>REGINA: Many lifeboats
have been sent.
>>HARVEY: Many lifeboats,
many messengers.
If you think this is
what the divine wants,
that we are killing everything
and living a completely
obscene life while
the poor starve,
then you have a very,
very crazy vision of God.
>>REGINA: And yet,
these cycles do happen.
If you go with the Yuga
Cycles, for example,
there are cycles dominated by
dark and dominated by light.
And on the large
scale, we're coming out
of a very, very
dark period, trying
to emerge-- attempting
to emerge into the light.
And let's just go back
as far as the 1960s,
in our recent history.
This was, cosmologically, the
beginning of a real opening
to plant the seed for
what you're saying now.
>>HARVEY: Well, it was.
But it was also failure.
>>REGINA: Yes, it didn't take.
>>HARVEY: I think
the '60s failed
because there wasn't
enough discipline.
And there wasn't enough
real, radical action.
All those people
that were decorated--
and I was in the '60s.
So most of my friends who were
dancing half-naked with flowers
in their hair then became
accountants and CEOs--
>>REGINA: This is true! [LAUGHS]
>>HARVEY: --and the rest of it.
So there wasn't enough real,
radical passion or commitment
to compassionate, just
action in the very vision
that imposed it.
Singing along to Bob Dylan--
glorious though he is--
is not quite enough for the
transformation to pan out.
>>REGINA: And you can say
this with all the introduction
of all of the world's
great spiritual traditions.
There were enlightened
beings, knowledgeable beings
that have come along throughout
history-- each one with a very
similar message-- to help us
begin to, not only take action,
but also to align with this
higher aspect of our own selves
that you call the
divine aspect of self.
And yet, it has not
been accomplished yet.
>>HARVEY: Well, I'm
not sure they all
came in with similar messages.
I think there are very
subtle differences.
>>REGINA: Well,
you are a scholar.
I know that.
>>HARVEY: No, no.
I think that what
we need to listen to
are the messages from
the enlightened ones that
stress action.
After all, you
can really believe
what the Buddha is teaching.
And you can really, then,
devote your life to meditation
to attain enlightenment.
But I don't think enlightenment
is enough in a time like this.
I don't think even that kind
of enlightenment is enough.
It's got to be an
enlightenment in the service
of compassionate, just action.
And that's why Jesus
is so important to me,
why the Prophet is
so important to me,
why the great Hindu reformers
are so important to me--
like Gandhi-- because
they say to us, look.
It's not enough to
have a divine awareness
and have a few astounding,
mystical experiences.
They're just the beginning.
They're the foundation.
If you don't realize
that the world is real,
and that we're in a real
crisis, and it's really
burning to death, and
we're really endangered,
you'll go off into your
transcendental addiction
and not focus on what
needs to be done right now.
>>REGINA: That is true.
And yet, we're dancing
on the edge of this sword
where we need to be enraged over
those things that are hurting
and damaging all life
forms on this planet.
And yet, at the same time,
it's really important
that we stop casting poison
darts at one another.
The judgment
portion of it really
does need to be dropped--
>>HARVEY: Well, no, I think--
>>REGINA: --while still
being enraged appropriately
to action.
>>HARVEY: Can I make
some distinctions
that might be helpful?
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>HARVEY: I think
it's very important
to make an extraordinarily clear
distinction between judgment--
which is always an ego activity
in which you're projecting
your own secret CEO,
your own serial killer,
your own addictive
power and lust and money
onto someone else,
conveniently, to get away
from understanding
your own shadow.
And everybody has
all of those shadows.
So that kind of judgement is
just a masturbation of the ego.
>>REGINA: And that's the one I'm
speaking of, not discernment.
>>HARVEY: Discernment
is absolutely essential.
Because we have to be able
to face those CEOs who
are addicted to
destroying the planet,
those politicians who are
in the pay of those CEOs,
and those media-barons who
are enacting the appalling
stupidities that keep
that madness going.
We have to be able to face
them and say, I love you.
I know why you're doing this.
I respect your brilliance.
But this is wrong--
>>REGINA: And I'm
turning the dial off.
>>HARVEY: --and it has to stop.
And we must stop this.
And we are going to mobilize.
We are going to mobilize
in a great, grassroots,
revolution of love in action.
We're not going to
condemn you, but we're not
going to let you get away
with it because the world is
at stake and because your
own souls are at stake.
>>REGINA: It's
withdrawing support
of the things that are
not working for us.
>>HARVEY: Yes, but
also protesting.
You see, Gandhi and
Martin Luther King
are marvelous examples.
Gandhi never
condemned the British.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>HARVEY: He condemned
the British actions
while honoring the spirit
of God in the British.
I don't condemn
the individual CEO.
But I may condemn the
action of an oil company
that rapes Nigeria and soils the
Amazon, et cetera, et cetera.
I don't condemn the
corrupt politician.
I understand that I have a
corrupt politician within me,
which is why I know
him or her so well.
But I absolutely protest
against the actions that
lead to degradation and
cruelty that emanate from that.
This is very important.
>>REGINA: So until we can
really see this, maybe,
not-so-divine complicity
that all of us have--
we all chose this
experience at this time,
to overcome these
shadows of ourselves--
until we can embrace--
>>HARVEY: I don't think you
ever overcome the shadows.
I think you can only--
>>REGINA: Accept?
>>HARVEY: --offer them up
for healing, consciously.
>>REGINA: OK, offer
them up for healing.
But until we acknowledge
that and can deal with that
in ourselves, it's very
difficult to be as generous
and forgiving-- I don't even
like the word forgiveness--
>>HARVEY: It's not
even forgiving--
>>REGINA: I don't
like that word.
>>HARVEY: --it's skillful.
You cannot be skillful with
people until you understand
that whatever you can't
stand in them, lives in you.
At which point, you have to
go to a very much deeper place
than judgment.
And God knows I love to judge.
And God knows I judge with
great ferocity in my life.
And mea culpa, mea maxima culpa.
>>REGINA: As have we at all.
>>HARVEY: But the
only way we'll ever
be skillful with people--
anybody is by understanding why
they're driven to do
the things they do,
by understanding the part
of them that is in us.
And from that place of wisdom,
from that place of compassion,
from that place of
beady-eyed self-knowledge--
which is also
knowledge of them--
we can evolve very, very
beautiful, skillful means
of holding people accountable
without damning them.
>>REGINA: Exactly,
and that really--
>>HARVEY: And that
is very important.
>>REGINA: That's the piece--
>>HARVEY: That is the piece.
>>REGINA: --that
has to be embraced,
whether we like it or not.
>>HARVEY: The New Age says,
it's all in God's order.
They're all wonderful.
They're all the divine.
This is bullshit.
This is nonsense.
Because some people
have, by their choices,
made themselves the
instrument of the dark.
And the dark is real both in
the transcendental, very high
levels and also in this level.
But even there, you
can redeem the dark.
By redeeming the
darkness in yourself
and learning how you do that
and constantly, constantly,
constantly committing
yourself-- like the Dalai Lama
does with the Chinese,
like Martin Luther King
did with the Southern
whites, like Gandhi
did with the British-- to
offering the very people who
are doing the
destruction ways out
that not only stop
the destruction,
but also stop their
destroying themselves.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
>>HARVEY: And that's
very important.
>>REGINA: And it's a process.
It's a crossover
period of history.
It's not going to immediately
transcend and heal.
We're still working
within existing structures
and infrastructures,
many of which
are burning down, as
we've talked about before.
>>HARVEY: But the
very big problem,
and you know this
as well as I do,
is that we have so little time.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>HARVEY: This transformation--
we don't have the luxury
to sit back and say, oh, this
is a difficult transition.
There are all these things
that have to be worked out.
Give us a few hundred years.
We don't have a
few hundred years.
By two thirty, most of
the forest of the Amazon
is going to be burnt down.
By then, the rest of the
seas will be polluted.
>>REGINA: The lungs
are gone in that case.
>>HARVEY: The lungs are gone.
So this transformation has to
go very fast, very urgently.
And at the moment,
I have to say,
there are very little signs
that it's going fast enough.
>>REGINA: Well, let me ask
you this, because I've said--
>>HARVEY: And, you
know, I pray constantly
to be illumined on that.
But I'm not depressed.
I'm just saying the
truth as I see it.
>>REGINA: Yes, and one thing
I've commented on many times
is that I hold a
great amount of hope
in the youth, the new type of
beings that are being born.
>>HARVEY: I agree with you.
>>HARVEY: I'm seeing a kind
of generosity between them.
And I don't have words exactly
beyond the word generosity.
They have a more open
spirit with each other--
>>HARVEY: Oh, very much.
>>REGINA: --and embrace
each other in ways
that previous
generations have not.
Now, there's evidence
that their DNA
may be coming in at a
more active rate, as well.
>>HARVEY: It may be.
>>REGINA: So we're going
through a genuine transformation
as a species.
And I'd like you to comment
on what you see in the youth
right now.
>>HARVEY: Well, I see
two kinds of youth.
One, absolutely
destroyed by our culture.
And we've been
talking about them.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>HARVEY: The other,
amazingly awake.
Because they start
where we left off.
They have the sexual
liberation in their genes.
They have the great
transformational liberation
of the best part of the
New Age in their genes.
And they have been
deeply disillusioned
by the so-called American dream,
or the dream of capitalism.
Because they see
it's not working.
They know perfectly well that
we're destroying the planet.
But it seems they're being
fed by secret divine sources.
They have energy.
They have generosity.
They're very open to ideas
like the gift economy,
like alternative
forms of living.
And the best of
Occupy, I think-- and I
spoke at a lot of
occupied places--
is that you see, in
Occupy at its best,
this new energy, this passion.
You see it in the Arab Spring.
We all know what's happening
to the Arab Spring.
It's been co-opted.
And it's been extinguished.
>>REGINA: Completely.
>>HARVEY: But in other
parts of the world,
for example, in
Algeria and in Tunisia,
there are major,
moderate Islamic parties
starting because of the young.
So it's not extinguishable,
this new energy
coming through the young.
And I hope to God that they will
become disciplined and focused
and realize that the powers
that rage against them
are very strong and demand
a really greater clarity
and organization than,
for example, Occupy had.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
>>HARVEY: You've
got to get savvy.
We're not dealing
with sweethearts.
We're dealing with very
powerful, cold-blooded,
laser-hearted maniacs, right?
>>REGINA: Yes, and
they do understand
all the systems
are failing them.
There's nothing they can
fall on or rely on, not even
finding a job out of college.
That's a luxury.
>>HARVEY: And they're sick
to death of the baby boomer
generation because they
know perfectly well how
narcissistic New
Age spirituality is.
>>REGINA: Their parents.
>>HARVEY: --parents are.
And they know that as long
as their parents can smoke
pot and buy whole foods,
they're not going to do much.
And they're depressed as
heaven by what they're seeing.
>>REGINA: Yes, many of them
do seem to be depressed.
>>HARVEY: But they're
are also doing something.
>>REGINA: Mmm, and there's
another element with them.
They are the generation that
has brought in transparency,
whether it is in an infantile
way through Facebook,
and Twitter, and
other mechanisms
for sharing every
single thing you
do in a given day
with each other.
The point is, they're not
trying to hold back and hide
the truth of what they are.
>>HARVEY: No, but don't you
think we can't just sit back.
And I'm 60.
And you're only 42, so it's OK.
>>REGINA: Barely.
>>HARVEY: But we can't
sit back as elders
and say, oh, the
young will do it.
Because what about all
those rich baby-boomers?
What are they going to
do with their money?
Are they going to golf
while the world burns?
Or just go off to Tahiti with
spurious spiritual teachers
to jipe up their tantric juices?
What are they going to do?
They have the power,
they have the money.
When are they going to
wake up and actually
start dedicating
their energies to--
>>REGINA: No, I agree with you.
I don't think we should
wait for the youth.
I think they're an important--
it's an important force
to recognize.
They are among us.
And they are offering--
>>HARVEY: It's a
source of great hope.
>>REGINA: It's a
>>HARVEY: But they
also need our wisdom.
And until we get really wise,
which is really getting down,
until we start being real
elders and real no-nonsense
truth-tellers, and until we
start really walking our talk,
their energy will not
get the wise wisdom
that it needs, the wise help.
>>REGINA: --the guidance
and counsel that it needs.
>>HARVEY: The
guidance and counsel--
so we need an alliance,
at the very deepest level,
between the wild, gorgeous,
hopeful energy of the young
and the prudent, no-nonsense,
and half bitchy clarity
of those who have weathered
the storms of life.
>>REGINA: Yes, and
it's interesting, too.
Because if you look at
this transformation--
this global transformation of
the environment, et cetera,
it requires the bringing
in of new technologies.
We know-- I know from
my work-- because I
have access to a lot
of underground sources
of information-- a lot
of those technologies
not only exists now,
they've existed for decades.
>>HARVEY: For 30, 40 years.
Yes.
>>REGINA: And in some cases,
even 100 years and beyond.
And they have been suppressed.
But the point that
some make-- and I
would like to get
your take on this--
is that when you take truly
profound technologies that
have the power to heal, to power
the planet, literally, and also
equally destructive potentials,
when does-- what does
it take for that
to safely emerge?
We are not conscious enough
on some levels for some of it.
>>HARVEY: Well, it cannot emerge
safely without a spiritual
transformation.
We have to go through
a profound shift
in spiritual consciousness,
which will teach us that never
again will we use the power
of technology to serve power.
It has to serve love,
harmony, balance,
and a wise relationship
with nature.
Otherwise, we will
reproduce this situation
and again come to
a place where we
are threatened
with annihilation.
So there is no way
out except through
a great evolutionary
transformation
in consciousness, which
results in a great burst
of sacred activism,
which results
in a transformed world, which
results in beings who truly
have been humbled by tragedy
and heartbreak and horror
enough to realize that
the divine will give you
divine consciousness and
divine power in a safe way
only if you are in a
truly humble position,
serving the laws of
justice and compassion
and harmony and
balance and reality.
Otherwise, you are
in terrible danger.
>>REGINA: Well, when
people hear those words,
it brings up the
subject of fear.
Do you believe that there
is a proper motivating place
for fear?
Even though--
>>HARVEY: Of course.
>>REGINA: --part of our
enlightenment process
is to triumph over
fear as best we can?
It has to be there,
it seems to me, just
to motivate people to the next
level, where we are right now.
>>HARVEY: [LAUGHS] When you
hear these New Age teachers
saying, ah, choose love,
not fear-- actually, love
is what makes you
properly afraid.
I think the human race is
not nearly afraid enough.
If you truly love the creation,
if you truly love the seas,
if you truly love white lions,
if you truly love the poor,
if you truly, truly
love women, if you truly
love your gay friends,
you are terribly
afraid of the oppressive
structures that
are keeping such
destruction going.
And you're extremely
committed to ending them,
so that your great
love can flower
in real truth in reality.
Also, if you're not afraid
of the destructive and lethal
power of your shadow, the
shadow of human beings,
and the shadow of
the power structures
that we've created out of
our shadow, you're insane.
You're living in Lala Land.
You're in some other
planet, which is not real.
You're smoking some
very bad crack.
And if you're not
afraid of truly, truly
betraying the deep awakened
self within you by corruption,
or by being seduced by power, or
by meaningless pursuit of sex,
drugs, rock and
roll when you really
need to be devoting yourself
to justice and compassion,
again, you have lost everything.
So there are many
kinds of fear that
are absolutely indispensable
to real enlightenment.
In fact, one day, I
asked the Dalai Lama
what the enlightened
consciousness was like.
And he said, the
enlightened person
is at once deeply, deeply
free and very scrupulous
about every single
thought and action.
Because the enlightened person
knows exactly how powerful
every thought and
action is, which
means that the enlightened
person is, in a deep sense,
afraid of not aligning with
the truth at every moment,
because he or she knows that not
to be aligned in that deepest
sense is to spread ignorance,
confusion, and delusion.
So that's a very
proper kind of fear.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
In some ancient
traditions, even negative
thought-- just negative thought
is considered black magic.
>>HARVEY: Yes, well, I
think it is black magic.
And I think the more you
understand about your thought
process-- I don't mean
negative thought about,
oh my god, the world is burning.
We need to have those thoughts,
because it's very important.
But negative thought
about I hate that person.
Or I judge that person.
Or I wish that person
was hit on the head 17
times with a saucepan.
That's not helpful.
>>REGINA: So I can have
their stuff. [LAUGHS]
>>HARVEY: Yes.
But you have to understand
that all thoughts do
have that profound
consequence and that you
have to constantly
align yourself
with the truth of
your essential nature.
And for everybody,
including, I imagine,
the Dalai Lama, that's hard.
It requires constant work.
>>REGINA: Well, we're human.
We are still here and embodied
in human form, of course.
>>HARVEY: Well, we're human with
enormous shadows that actually
grow larger the higher you go.
It's not that you
ever lose your shadow.
In fact--
>>REGINA: --the
greater the contrast!
>>HARVEY: --the further
you go into the light,
the greater the shadow
you take and the more you
have to absorb of the
darkness within you.
>>REGINA: So let's talk
about the global aspect
of sacred activism.
From your perception,
you're traveling
around the world lecturing
all the time, what is actually
taking root?
And then, we have
probably about 10 minutes
or so left in our conversation.
Let's talk about
that and how people
can become involved in
and of themselves, just
personally involved.
>>HARVEY: Well, I am lecturing.
But most of all, I'm training.
Because at this moment,
what is essential
is not to speak to people,
but to help people train.
Because what I'm trying
to do in my institute
and all around the
world is to help people
get down with the
situation, equip themselves
with the practices they need,
and start doing something
with others to begin the
great transfiguration.
>>REGINA: What are
some expressions
of this that are
occurring right now?
>>HARVEY: Well, what's
really important
is that I think people
need to understand the five
kinds of service
that anybody can
do to become a sacred activist.
>>REGINA: Please share.
>>HARVEY: The first
is to really serve
the divine with love and
thanksgiving and praise.
Because if you do, if you open
your heart all the time to God,
God will shower you with
wisdom and energy and joy.
And you'll be guided to what you
need for your transformation.
The second kind of service--
and this is very, very important
and many activists forget this--
is to really, really serve
your own instrument.
Because you must be
healthy emotionally,
psychologically,
spiritually to be
able to be the instrument
of divine transformation.
And that requires five
kinds of practice.
It requires cool practices
that help you calm down.
It requires hot
practices that help
you keep your heart
vibrant and juicy.
>>REGINA: Give us
examples of both.
>>HARVEY: Cool practice--
meditation without images,
just watching your thoughts.
Walking meditation,
breathing meditation.
Hot practice is
practices that awaken
the passionate, sacred heart,
like the Sufi practices,
like the Christ practice of
working with the Sacred Heart,
like the Hindu practice
of saying the name of God
passionately in the heart.
Then, you need a
prayer practice.
Because you want
to align yourself
with the will of the Beloved.
Then, you need physical
practices like yoga and reiki
and all these practices
that can keep--
or sacred dance-- that
can keep your body flowing
with the energies.
And then, you need shadow work.
Because you've got to be
working with shadow work.
Third kind of service
you need is really
a service to all
living, sentient beings,
human beings of every
kind, but also animals.
Because animals are in
a world-wide Auschwitz
of our making at this moment.
And if we don't
realize that we are
the Gauleiters of a horrible
Auschwitz in which we are
killing our brothers and sisters
in the most unspeakable way,
we are really out to lunch.
It's terrible.
It has to stop.
The fourth kind of
practice and service
is service to your community.
Think global, but act local.
And if you want to find
out what your mission is,
I invite people to wake up
at 3 o'clock in the morning,
to ground themselves in
the great peace of God,
and then ask themselves
one question, what,
of all the causes in the world,
breaks my heart the most?
Because what I've discovered and
what all the sacred activists
that I know have discovered
is that, when you identify
your deepest heartbreak, you
identify your most passionate
mission.
>>REGINA: Is this
not the part that you
were talking about earlier?
That through your
contemplative practice,
you will be guided to in
your honoring of the divine?
>>HARVEY: You won't
always be guided to it
unless you know that
God is love in action.
Because many people
use contemplation
as another kind of heroin,
to sign off from engagement.
So unless you know
that God is the mother,
too, passionately in love
with justice and compassion
on every level, you might
be using your meditation
to sign off rather than sign on.
>>REGINA: No, that is true.
So that's why you'd
make the distinction,
3 o'clock in the morning?
The witching hour?
>>HARVEY: Yes,
the witching hour.
>>REGINA: The truth hour.
>>HARVEY: But also why I
ask the question like that.
Because in the New Age,
they say, find your bliss.
But the reality is you don't
find your bliss until you've
found your heartbreak first.
Because when you start
working for your heartbreak,
then you find the
greatest bliss of all,
which is to be love in action.
And then, the fifth
kind of service
is the service to
the whole birth,
to realize that all of
your actions and thoughts,
and all of your economic and
political and social choices,
have now to be aligned
with the new world
that you're trying to
dream into fruition.
Otherwise, you are
part of the problem
and not part of the solution.
If you believe-- if you're
sitting on your meditation
cushion having fantastic
intimations of emptiness
and you're still investing
your money in Monsanto,
there's something wrong.
If you're still riding a
polluting car excessively,
you're wrong.
You see what I'm saying?
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>HARVEY: You have to get
your whole choices aligned
in the truth.
>>REGINA: You need
to be coherent.
>>HARVEY: You need
to be congruent.
And this is very
hard for all of us.
And we all fail.
But the more we
are, the more we're
aligned with this great,
evolutionary love-fire.
>>REGINA: And, you
know, you've met
with people that are very
well-steeped in the world
of emerging, alternative
finance and such.
>>HARVEY: Yes.
>>REGINA: And we know
some of the same people.
And there are really some
very beautiful movements--
>>HARVEY:
--extraordinary people.
>>REGINA: --waiting
for this consciousness
to emerge to support it.
It's not as though those
systems aren't there.
You talked earlier about
how our economic system
is going to burn to
ashes, which it should.
The way it's modeled
now, it probably should.
But--
>>HARVEY: There's
another economic system
waiting to come up.
>>REGINA: --at the
same time, there
are others coming up underneath.
>>HARVEY: Of course,
the phoenix is
going to rise, potentially,
out of the ashes.
And the phoenix, certainly
in economic terms,
looks like the amazing
work of Lietaer
and Charles Eisenstein, these
extraordinary visionaries.
>>REGINA: Steven
Belgian and the work
he's done with
Lietaer and others.
>>HARVEY: Steven
Belgian, these people
are really, in a grounded
way, imagining a new world
based on the gift economy,
based on mutual responsibility,
based on mutual compassion.
And this is not fantasy.
Because when I was young
man, I went to the Himalayas
to a place called Ladakh.
And I saw people
living like this.
We have lived like this.
And we have been much
happier and much more joyful
than we are now.
This is also seeded in our DNA.
We're not just corrupt,
capitalistic dominators
and exploiters.
We've lived in
harmony with nature.
We've lived in harmony
with each other.
We've truly given to each other.
And it's this part of
the human being that
is going to come
forward-- I hope and pray.
And these systems are
being imagined right now.
>>REGINA: Yes, they are.
>>HARVEY: This is the
most creative moment
in human history.
It's also the most devastating.
>>REGINA: It's
absolutely-- it's divine.
I mean, well, obviously,
it's divinely inspired.
And just bringing
Steven up for a moment
and talking about his
experience in life
and what he's had to heal within
himself-- to come to the point
to be able to offer
this when he says,
I carry all the information
of my tribe-- he's Jewish.
Yet, one of his greatest
spiritual brothers
is Palestinian.
And same thing, he has
another relationship
of a very divine order
with another person who
is a German man in this world
of business and economics.
But he said, this part has to
be present and healed within us
for this to work,
and within all of us.
>>HARVEY: Yes, we have
to make massive efforts
of reconciliation of the
opposites at every level for us
to have a hell of a
chance to get through it.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
OK, so tell us a little
bit about the Institute.
>>HARVEY: The Institute of
Sacred Activism-- and I'm
opening it all
over the world-- is
dedicated to training
sacred activists.
Fundamentally,
I've been involved
in initiation which lasts a
week and is in three parts,
like the initiation of
the ancient mysteries.
The first part is dedicated
to massive inspiration.
Because nobody's
going to do the work
unless they realize that
there's a huge beauty possible
and a great joy accessible.
The second part is
devoted to a descent
into where we really are.
And the third part is
devoted to the marriage
of the wisdom of the light with
the wisdom of the dark, focused
on real, compassionate action.
>>REGINA: But there's
only one of you, Andrew!
>>HARVEY: Oh, that's not true.
>>REGINA: I mean, one
very energetic one of you.
But do you have
ambassadors, so to speak,
who've been trained in--
>>HARVEY: Yes, I have
wonderful teachers,
wonderful people around,
wonderful yoga teachers,
wonderful meditation teachers.
I'm not unique.
There are many people working--
>>REGINA: That are
involved in this.
>>HARVEY: --in this territory.
What my job was, this life,
was to give the roadmap
to the human race,
as far as I could
with all my follies and
flaws, of sacred activism
and the transfiguration of the
world that it makes possible.
I am doing this.
And I have done this.
And I will continue to do this.
I don't do this as a guru.
I am not unique.
I do this as a fellow traveler
and as a brother and sister
of every single human being.
>>REGINA: And as a lover.
>>HARVEY: And as a lover--
>>REGINA: And are there
any surprisingly fertile--
>>HARVEY: --of animals.
>>REGINA: --of all things.
>>HARVEY: Yeah, especially cats.
>>REGINA: Yes, especially cats.
We have to get that there.
>>HARVEY: Cats and opera.
>>REGINA: --and opera.
Is there a particularly
fertile area
where this has taken seed
that might be very unexpected?
Just to give us a little
glimpse into what's possible?
>>HARVEY: Well, it's
beginning to take seed
in South Africa, which
is a very, very intensely
tragic situation.
It's beginning to
take seed in Poland,
which is also a very
stricken situation.
It's beginning to take seed
in Australia, because I'm
working with the Dalai Lama
of the Australian Aborigines.
And that is a very
comatose situation,
rather like the States.
The States is the most
difficult of all cultures
to work in because people are
really in a state of coma.
But even in the
States, it's growing.
Wonderful people like Adam Bucko
of the Reciprocity Homeless
Foundation.
He's doing extraordinary
sacred activism.
It's the new wave of truth,
the Second Wave as Chris Saade
says.
Millions of people--
>>REGINA: Tell us that briefly.
We have a minute left.
>>HARVEY: The Second Wave is the
second wave after the New Age.
First, the New Age,
that first wave.
And then, it became
narcissistic and self-absorbed
and corporately dominated.
Now, the second wave, which
is the wave of love in action.
And there are many voices of
that, Matthew Fox, Dorothy
Soelle, Martin Luther
King, Desmond Tutu.
And all of them are
saying, we can't
go on watching this destruction.
We have to react to it.
And we have to react
to it from divine love,
from divine wisdom, from divine
peace, from divine passion.
>>REGINA: Well,
along that line, I
will do what I can to
reach many of the people
that you have deep respect for
and bring them to our audience
as well.
>>HARVEY: You are
doing a fabulous job.
And what you're doing is
sacred activism, so thank you.
>>REGINA: Thank you,
Andrew, once again.
As always, Andrew is one of
the most inspiring voices
out there.
You can follow up in the ways
that he's just suggested,
and you can also go deeper
into his life's work
through one of his
many, many brilliant
and inspirational
books, especially
"The Hope: A Guide
to Sacred Activism."
You can also learn more
about Andrew's Institute
for Sacred Activism and
how to become involved
through his website,
AndrewHarvey.net.
Until next time, thank you for
joining us here at Gaiam TV.
[MUSIC PLAYING]